.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Paul Herman
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id: tcpprof.1,v 1.4 2002/07/25 16:09:08 pherman Exp $
.\" ---
.\"
.Dd December 22, 2001
.Dt TCPPROF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tcpprof
.Nd report profile of network traffic
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm 
.Op Fl ?hdnpR
.Op Fl f Ar filter expr
.Op Fl i Ar interface
.Op Fl P Ar port
.Op Fl r Ar filename
.Op Fl s Ar seconds
.Op Fl S Ar letters
.Op Fl t Ar lines
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reports a profile of network traffic by ranking it by link type, ip protocol,
TCP/UDP port, ip address, or network address.
.Pp
Network information is collected either by reading data from
.Ar filename ,
or by directly monitoring the network interface
.Ar interface .
The default action for
.Nm
is to automatically search for an appropriate
interface, and to generate a profile before it exits.
.Pp
When reading data from
.Ar filename ,
.Nm
will display the profile and exit immediately after the
entire file has been processed.  When collecting data from
.Ar interface ,
.Nm
will keep running unless the
.Fl s
option had been specified.
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl f Ar filter expr
Filter the packets according the rules given by
.Ar filter expr .
For the syntax of these rules, see
.Xr tcpdump 1 .
The argument must be quoted if it contains spaces in order to separate it
from other options.
.It Fl h , Fl ?
Display version and a brief help message.
.It Fl d
.Nm
will track the source and destination information separately,
where applicable, and identify source data with a ">" and
destination data with "<".  For example, a "http <" statistic
signifies all traffic with destination port 80 (http). This option
only applies to port, host and network statistics.
.It Fl i Ar interface
Do a live capture (rather than read from a file) on the interface
.Ar interface
given on the command line.  If
.Ar interface
is "auto" then
.Nm
tries to find an appropriate one by itself.
.It Fl P Ar port
This tells
.Nm
to ignore TCP and UDP ports greater than or equal to
.Ar port 
when displaying port statistics.
This is not the same as filtering these port numbers out
of the data set.  This way, packets with i.e. the source port above
.Ar port
and the destination port below
.Ar port
will be able to still count the lower port number as a statistic.
In addition, this doesn't affect the other statistic types (link,
protocol, etc.)
.It Fl p
Set the interface into non-promiscuous mode (promiscuous
is the default) when doing live captures.
.It Fl r Ar filename
Read all data from
.Ar filename ,
which may be a regular file, a named pipe or "-" to read it's data from
standard input. Acceptable file formats include pcap
.Xr (tcpdump 1
files) and "snoop" format files.
.Ar filename
is usually a file created by the
.Xr tcpdump 1
command using the "-w" option.
.It Fl S Ar letters
Tells
.Nm
which statistics to display.
.Ar letters
must be a string of one or more of the following letters:
.Bl -tag -width %%%%
.It l
show stats about the link layer
.It i
show stats about all ip protocols
.It p
show stats about TCP/UDP ports
.It h
show stats about hosts/ip addresses
.It n
show stats about network addresses
.It a
a synonym for "liphn"
.El
.It Fl s Ar seconds
When monitoring an interface,
.Nm
runs for only 
.Ar seconds 
seconds, and then quits.  Has no effect when reading data from a file.
.It Fl t Ar lines
When printing a profile of the data,
.Nm
will display a maximum of
.Ar lines
lines for each statistic.
.El
.Sh SIGNALS
Upon receiving a SIGINT,
.Nm
will print any remaining statistics, and then exit.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/bpfXXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/bpf Ns Sy n
the packet filter device
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl tcpprof -i fxp0 -S a
.Pp
Displays a complete profile of network data 
passing through the fxp0 network interface, after the user enters
^C (control C).
.Pp
.Dl tcpprof -r file.dump -S a
.Pp
Displays a complete profile of network data from the
.Xr tcpdump 1
generated file "file.dump".
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tcpdump 1 ,
.Xr pcap 3 ,
.Xr bpf 4
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was first written along side tcpstat in Winter 1998 using FreeBSD 3.0,
and then finaly retrofited for Linux in Spring 2000.  It became installed
along with tcpstat since version 1.5.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Paul Herman Aq pherman@frenchfries.net
.br
Cologne, Germany.
.Pp
Please send all bug reports to this address.
.Sh BUGS
Not tested with link types other than Ethernet, PPP, and "None" types.  
.Pp
There may be problems reading non-IPv4 packets across platforms when
reading null type link layers.  This is due to a lack of a standardized
packet type descriptor in libpcap for this link type.
.Pp
Snoop file formats cannot be read from stdin or named pipes.
